---
title: "Ethics"
date: 2023-08-24T10:55:35-06:00
draft: true
---

Generative AI is a difficult topic for many, especially those whose lives and livelihoods are impacted by the need to compete with a technology built on the fruits of their labor that can put out product faster than they can hope to do. With this, as with most things in my life, I take a pragmatic view.

It is, unfortunately, a little late to be talking about the ethics of what content goes into training AI. We really should have had that conversation back in 2016, when Google Translate--trained without permission on the labor of human translators--began putting those translators out of business. This did not cause much of a stir, compared to now, which a cynical part of me wants to say is because people don't really care about translators much: they're a small, specialized group that people don't think of often. Certainly no legislation was passed on the topic, no widespread cultural conversation was had. And so as the translation profession dwindled and changed, companies and researchers remained empowered to create similar AI, until they came up with something impressive enough to frighten much larger groups of people--and here we are.

That's not to say that we shouldn't talk and create legislation now: better late than never. But we have to do so with the understanding that the genie is out of the bottle now, and can't be put back into it. Stable Diffusion, Llama, and many other models are freely and openly available without restrictions; nobody can take that back. Even if they are outlawed and removed from the internet, even if HuggingFace and Civitai are taken down, the models still exist on thousands of people's computers.

AI is here. If it's going to be making people's lives worse, let's at least make sure that we also use it to make people's lives *better*.

And AI can, and does, make people's lives better.

For many, many years at this point, Google Translate has enabled people to speak to each other--however clumsily--who would never otherwise be able to do so, has enabled cross-cultural flows of ideas by allowing people to read things in languages they don't know, and has (counter-intuitively) assisted people in learning new languages. For all that it has ruined careers--some might say ruined an entire profession--it has also improved many lives.

## A story about myself

I've been drawing, painting, making visual art since I was a small child, drawing detailed pencil drawings of dragons on the bus on the way to elementary school. I was never very *good:* I suffered terribly from that malady where my eye was better than my hand, making me able to see issues that I was unable to fix. Drawing was often a frustrating exercise, and so it was difficult to progress. Still, even as I focused on other creative pursuits, sometimes the spirit would take me, and I would try to put some image into my head onto paper. I made a lot of trash pictures, and a few beautiful works of art that I am still proud of.

Then there was the injury.

If it had been caught and treated sooner, it might have healed cleanly, but I was stubborn and not used to validating my own medical needs, so I iced it--which I later learned was the exact wrong thing to do--and pushed on. But I didn't come to the understanding that it was something needing medical attention until much later, at which point it was too late: it was permanent. And perhaps worse, it was unknown and--with current medical understanding--unknowable. Every test came out clean. My nerves were fine, my tendons were fine, my *body* was fine. Nothing was wrong. Other than the pain. Eventually the diagnosis was found, tentative as it was: a nervous system problem in which my brain refused to believe that my injury had gone, and insistently kept sending strange, illogical pain signals long after my body had healed.

As permanent disabilities go, I'm lucky: with the help of expensive ergonomic technology, daily painkillers, and lifestyle changes, I live a mostly normal, pain-free life. But the lifestyle cost is steep: I've played the piano since I was five, and had spent a great deal of money on my own piano, which I now can never play again. I was deeply passionate about rock climbing, a hobby which brought me joy and was the first form of exercise I could do regularly and with enthusiasm. Now I can barely climb a V1 without starting to feel the bewildering sensation of the underside of my skin shivering. (I still haven't had the heart to cancel my climbing gym membership; it feels too much like giving up.) Typing a single word on my laptop keyboard makes my entire arm go freezing cold for days. Daring to try to draw risks days or weeks of bone-deep ache that can only be smothered under a dogpile of painkillers. And writing--the thing I've done every day since I was a child, that I identify with more than my career or relationships--is sometimes simply impossible.

It's a cliche, but I don't like to think about my limitations. After all, it's not like I'm helpless: my expensive keyboard, the ergonomic mice I switch between regularly, the godawfully expensive, endlessly frustrating dictation software--most of the time it works. But some days, it's not enough. Sometimes nothing helps, and all I can do is curl up with a heating pad and try to bear through it. And at those times, I can't help but start thinking again about all the parts of my life that I lost.

I didn't start using Stable Diffusion because I wanted a solution to all of that. My response to most things that are kicking up a lot of dust among my friends group is to investigate further, so I wanted to see what it actually could do. I was unimpressed overall with its ability to replace artists, but came to the conclusion that it could be a powerful tool for them. But in learning how to do that, I discovered that sometimes an image that was generated for some other purpose would spark an idea, and I would spend days happily bouncing between image editors and Stable Diffusion, massaging it into giving me something that matched the image in my head. I didn't realize that it was partially filling the hole in my life left by my injury until my computer went down, and I attempted to return to sketching by hand, leading to a flare-up that lasted months and had me wondering whether I could ever return to a pain-free daily existence again.

(I still haven't worked up the courage to go back down to my regular dose of painkillers--meaning that if I get another flare-up, I won't have any room to raise the dose. I'll either have to convince my doctor to give me more, or just... live with it.)

It's hard to keep my cool when I hear discussions against AI. So much of it frames generative AI as something used only by exploitative capitalists and selfish tech bros who value their hobbies more than they do the people whose careers are disrupted by it. As far as the cultural conversation around AI is concerned, I might as well not exist. My pain, my grief, my happiness--those things aren't important. Not important enough to talk about, not important enough to take into account, or to spare even a single tweet's worth of words in a whole Twitter thread.

AI can't let me rock climb again, or play the piano, or live a life where every purchase of anything my hands will touch requires research and guesswork and the resignation to the fact that I will inevitably waste a *lot* of money on things that I thought would be perfect, but which ended up making things worse. It can't give me back a life where doctors know what's going on and I don't have to worry about whether they'll even believe me when I tell them what's happening to me, or a life where I never have to worry about whether my painkillers are going to run out before I can get a refill, or whether I'm building up a tolerance to them. It can't return to me most of the things that I lost.

And there are so many things that I lost. And I get *one* of them back, just one. Fuck me for wanting to keep it, right?

"But Hush," you might be thinking, "this is a site about language models, not Stable Diffusion. Isn't this pretty off-topic?" Kinda. But the discussion about AI is broader than any single implementation of it. And for all their flaws, language models improve lives too, even in the relatively narrow use this site focuses on: they can provide a powerful assist to *human* creativity, enabling works that would never otherwise be able to exist; they can provide comfort in the midst of crushing loneliness; and help--paradoxically--for those suffering from the disability of chronic mental illness.

Technology has been leaving people behind for centuries. It's our duty to try to care for the people that technology leaves behind, whether it's AI or automation or something else. But we need to take care that we don't dismiss the joy and comfort that technology enables either.
